---
title: "5.7. Comparison of Data Containers"
collection: Python
permalink: /Python/container-comparison/
date: 2024-09-08
---
# Classification of Data Containers
1. Containers that support indexing (Sequence types):

    **List, Tuple, and String are sequence types**.They allow access to their elements via indexing, where elements are stored at specific positions, and can retrieve or modify them using their index.

2. Containers that do not support indexing (Non-sequence types):

    **Set and Dictionary are non-sequence types**.These containers do not maintain a specific order for elements, so they do not support accessing elements via indexing.

# Support for Duplicate Elements
1. Containers that allow duplicate elements: List, Tuple, and String allow storing duplicate elements.
   
2. Containers that do not allow duplicate elements: Set and Dictionary do not allow duplicate keys.

# Mutability (Can elements be modified?)
1. Containers that can be modified (Mutable): List, Set, and Dictionary are mutable containers, meaning can add, remove, or modify elements after the container is created.
2. Containers that cannot be modified (Immutable): Tuple and String are immutable containers, meaning once they are created, their elements cannot be changed.
   
# Common Operations
1. Traversal:All containers support the `for` loop for traversal.List, Tuple, and String also support `while` loops because they are sequence types and have ordered elements.Set and Dictionary do not support `while` loops for direct traversal as they lack indexing.

2. Counting the number of elements: The function `len(container)` is used to return the number of elements in a data container.This is applicable for all containers: lists, tuples, strings, sets, and dictionaries.

3. Finding the maximum element: The function `max(container)` returns the largest element in the container based on the element type.This works for any container where elements can be compared (e.g., lists, tuples, strings). It may not work for sets or dictionaries with mixed data types.
   
4. Finding the minimum element:The function `min(container)` returns the smallest element in the container.Similar to `max()`, this works on comparable elements in containers like lists, tuples, and strings.

# Data Conversion
1. `list(container)`: Converts the given container into a list.
2. `str(container)`: Converts the container into a string.
3. `tuple(container)`:Converts the container into a tuple.
4. `set(container)`: Converts the container into a set.

# Sorting Data Containers
`sorted(container)`: Return a new sorted version of the container's elements.Example: `sorted([3, 1, 2])` returns `[1, 2, 3]` and `sorted([3, 1, 2], reverse=True)` returns `[3, 2, 1]`
